(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.) ACT III.
SCENE I.
A SALOON FURNISHED.
WINDOWS AND BALCONY CENTRE, DOORS RIGHT AND
LEFT.
A MADONNA RIGHT, CHAIR LEFT.
BLAZARILLO DISCOVERED, ARRANGING TABLE
RIGHT.
I was prepared for the arrival of Don
José.
What can be the meaning of these mysterious
proceedings?
This house so suddenly engaged, this lady
for whom he seems to entertain so great
a respect?
Should the queen hear of this?
Farewell to the Count's hopes of conquest.
Ah, he is here.
Enter DON JOSÉ, LEFT A SECOND ENTRANCE.
Has anyone arrived?
Yes, my lord, the lady.
She is now in that chamber.
The servants and horses?
Returned instantly to Madrid.
Shall I announce your lordship?
No.
Do you remember the cavalier who addressed
me yesterday near the escuril?
Yes, my lord.
Was it not the king?
Silence.
Passes him to left.
He will be here to-night.
He alone must be admitted to this apartment.
Should any others present themselves, my
lord?
Refuse them admittance.
If they insist, you have your arquebus.
Use it.
I will use it, my lord.
Go.
Blazarillo exit left's second entrance.
This Don César, who I thought dead, how
did he escape?
His presence at this moment would ruin all.
I will delay no longer.
Tonight shall see my plans accomplished.
The king will be here anon, and I
have already dispatched a message to the
queen, apprising her of her husband's
infidelity.
She comes to-night to the neighbouring
palace of Aránguez.
There will I seek her and urge a
suit, which, in revenge, she may accord me.
A horn at a distance.
Ah, the signal of the king.
Enter Maritana, right second entrance.
What means that?
Seize Don José.
Ah, the Count de Santarém.
Don José with a ceremony.
I trust that my orders have been punctually
obeyed, madame?
There is nothing you require?
Nothing, nothing, I thank you.
Then your bright dreams are realised.
You have title, splendour, homage.
Did I not prophesy rightly, madame?
I have kept every promise.
You have, Don José, though the Countess de
Bassan already regressed the wishes of
Maritana.
Weeps.
Wherefore?
Why these tears?
I think me not ungrateful to you and
the queen, but amidst the splendour which
surrounds me I often sigh for the free
course and happy thoughts of the poor
dancing girl.
Hush.
Enter Lazarillo, left second entrance.
He is here, my lord.
Who?
Your husband, madame.
My husband?
Weeps.
The king enters, left second entrance.
Don José salutes him respectfully, and signs
to Lazarillo and both exsuant right.
King aside.
At length we are together.
Allowed.
Maritana.
Maritana aside.
Evan, how I tremble even at his voice.
Why did you not answer me?
Why did you not approach me?
Pardon me, my lord, but— Your lips are
colourless.
Takes her hand.
Your hand is icy as death.
Maritana taking away her hand.
I— Aside.
I cannot speak.
Wherefore this chilling welcome?
Are you not happy?
Maritana aside.
Happy?
Allowed.
How shall I answer you?
Can you wonder at my uneasiness?
Our strange marriage, the distance which
separates us, the noble and the beggar.
I still feel how much you are my
superior.
I dare not raise my eyes to yours.
I— I fear you.
Fear me?
With what fear?
We would know.
Pauses.
Oh, Maritana, how you wrong me by such
feelings.
I love you, and would sacrifice all to
know my love returned.
Kisses her hand, which she withdraws.
What?
Don José told me you waited my company
with impatience.
He has deceived me.
Not you alone, my lord.
I also have been deceived.
How?
By this union.
The husband that he assigned me was one
proscribed and ruined, but still both brave
and noble.
His sword was ever the defender of the
weak, his voice the advocate of the
oppressed.
Where'er he went, mirth followed after.
A wanderer like myself, I felt almost as
equal.
I thought that he would know my heart,
and from his memory of the past, forgive
errors of the present.
Nor shall you be deceived.
Each luxury shall minister to your desires.
My love shall be so prodigal that, in
spite of all, you shall return my passion.
Embracing her, Maritana disengaging herself.
Unhand me, count, unhand me.
Keen and raged.
I understand.
You love another, Maritana.
Your heart, I thought, never beat with
passion or desire.
I am deceived.
For this I've made you what you are.
Ingrate, to your chamber, madam.
You must learn the duty you owe your
lord and husband.
I obey you.
You have reason for your anger.
I obey you, my lord and my master.
Exit right door.
Doth she relent?
Why should I hesitate?
Going towards right door.
She may yet be won.
A shot heard.
Don Cesar enters over balcony, left centre.
That's a villainous way to receive a guest.
What the devil have I done to be
continually made a target?
The king retires and observes.
Lazario enters left centre with an arquebus
in his hand.
Lazario starts.
Don Cesar.
Exit left door.
Well?
Seize the king.
Pardon, señor.
I had not the honour of seeing you
till this moment.
King bows.
Why did you enter by that window?
Well, señor, simply because the door was
shut.
I am in no humour for jesting.
What is your motive?
A pardonable one.
By the light of the moon, I saw
in the next balcony a very pretty woman,
and I wished to speak to her.
What, sir?
I knocked at the door.
The porter refused me admittance.
How was I to get in?
There was but one opening, and that was
the window.
I was about to ascend when whizz came
a bullet through my hat.
Shell's hole in his hat.
Sacred hospitality.
How you are insulted.
What is your business with this lady?
Pardon me.
I never violate confidence.
I merely wish to see her.
That's all.
Impertinent.
I desire you to quit the room.
After the trouble I've had to get here?
Are you— The master of this house.
The master of this house?
Hmm.
This house.
Where have I seen the Countess de Bazin?
You know her, then?
Very slightly.
I've only seen her for about ten minutes,
but if she resides here, may I ask
your name?
King Hotterly.
I am— Pauses.
Looks at the door of Maritana's chamber.
I am Don Cesar de Bazin.
Sits.
Eh?
Don Cesar de Bazin?
Aside.
Eghad.
I excel a phoenix, for two Don Cesars
have arisen from my ashes.
Enter Lazzarillo Centre.
Now that I have satisfied you, I demand
to know your name.
Don Cesar aside.
The unblushing rascal.
Lazzarillo whispers aside to Don Cesar.
It is the king.
Exit the left door.
Eh, Larissio?
You hesitate, sir.
Don Cesar aside.
The king here?
I understand all.
My question embarrasses you.
I demand an answer.
Certainly.
If you are Don Cesar de Bazin— Seats
himself left centre with dignity, and places
his hat on his head.
I am the king of Spain.
What?
The king?
The king of Spain.
You?
Don Cesar, tauntingly and pleasantly.
As surely as you are Don Cesar de
Bazin.
Ah, it astonishes you to see Majesty
unattended at this hour of the night, at
the door of a pretty woman who is
not the queen?
There's nothing surprising in it, I assure
you.
I was out of spirits.
Kings require relaxation sometimes, but not
a word of this royal folly.
Though with you, Don Cesar, I may rest
satisfied.
You will not betray our secret.
King aside.
Insolent.
Who can he be?
Ha, by the by.
I remember Don Cesar.
I know all my subjects.
A witty, gallant fellow, somewhat of my own
humour.
He killed the captain of our guard in
a duel in spite of our royal edict.
He was shot in the outer court of
the barrack.
Rises and advances to the king.
Be kind enough to answer me one question.
If you are Don Cesar, what right have
you to be alive?
If I were to denounce you, every loyal
Spaniard would be ready to pink you.
Calmly.
But we will not betray you.
King rises.
Your Majesty forgets.
It is possible the keeper of the king's
memory has gone hunting with the keeper of
the king's conscience.
But what has our majesty forgotten?
You forget that Don Cesar received the
pardon of the king.
Indeed.
At eight o'clock on the night of
his condemnation.
His pardon at eight?
Aside.
But I was shot at seven.
Allowed.
I remember we did pardon Don Cesar an
hour too late.
Aside.
Though I don't grumble.
You see, it would be useless to denounce
me.
As useless as for me to retain a
title which does not belong to me.
Then you are not the king of Spain?
No.
You suspected as much, I suppose.
Am I right?
And you are?
Enter Lazario left.
A man who need not fear to meet
a legion of alguazils.
I am?
Lazario down left.
Sire, a private messenger.
Kneels and gives letter.
King crosses to Lazario quickly.
What is this?
Reads.
A treason.
The queen knows of my absence at the
palace of Aran ways.
My horse boy, stay.
Aside to Lazario.
You are attached to Don Jose?
Yes, sire.
Keep close watch on that man.
Let him be removed.
And above all, learn his name.
Exit left.
Don Cesar, is it you?
Yes, me that you rescued from a dishonourable
death.
I had nigh perform the office of executioner
myself.
Don Cesar shows hat.
True.
But I knew not that it was you.
I...
Sure, could I doubt you, Larizio?
But tell me, am I to leave this
house?
Such are my orders.
If I refuse?
If I resist?
Resist?
Who will oppose you?
There is no one here but myself.
I am the servant of Don Cesar.
Good lad, should I ever grow rich?
You will retain me in your service.
Service?
You shall have a dozen lackeys to wait
on you.
But Larizio, there is a lady in this
house.
Yes.
I wish to see her.
You must take me to her.
Into Maritana right.
She is here, my lord.
A stranger.
Leave us, Larizio.
Exit Larizio, left second entrance.
Well, madam, we have met at last.
Maritana starts at his voice and listens
intently.
As her recognition of him occurs, she
evinces pleasure.
Not without some trouble and some danger on
my part.
I've been hunted by a full pack of
Alguazils and fired at by a tolerably good
marksman, and all for this interview.
That voice!
I fear to satisfy myself lest my new
-born hopes should wither.
You seem surprised.
You do not know me, Maritana.
Nevertheless, we are known to each other so
well that I can tell you your history.
Signior!
Aside.
To what will this lead?
Maritana, you are called beautiful.
Looking at her.
Very beautiful.
You know that you were so, and grew
dissatisfied with your humble station, you
thought so fair a flower ought not to
fade in the streets.
Whilst the salons of Madrid might be adorned
by its beauty, the thought pleased you, and
from that time it became a desire.
Was it not so?
You are right, Signior, and you are— Your
judge, madam.
But one that would not judge so harshly
of you as of myself, for you but
sought an honourable position, he has
abandoned one.
Go on.
Though I have belied my rank, I have
preserved my honour and my name.
Why ask this of me?
Because I am your husband, Don Cesar de
Berzan.
You— Regards him passionately.
You doubt me, Maritana?
I now know all.
You thought my death was certain.
You paused not to acquire the title.
You coveted, even in a prison.
When you left the altar, you listened for
the sounds that were to bring death to
me and liberty to you.
Maritana, horror-stricken.
What say you?
Thus did you acquire a title and a
name, which you have consigned to infamy.
It was more than criminal.
It was cowardly.
Tis false.
I am never wrong my husband's honour, even
in thought.
Tenderly.
But you are indeed my husband.
Another has claimed the title of Don Cesar,
and— Mockery.
The King of Spain needs not the influence
of so poor a name.
Cross is right.
The King of Spain?
Ay, the King of Spain.
Royal wooers seldom sue in vain.
Stay.
Prove to me your right to question, and
I will answer all.
What proof have you to give that you
are not deceiving me, that you are my
husband?
What proof?
My honour.
You spoke to me but once.
Do you remember the words you then addressed
to me?
Perfectly, madam.
To you I devote the rest of my
existence.
You are my husband.
Those are the words you uttered.
She is advancing.
He repels her.
Your pardon, madam.
Your royal lover brooks no rival.
Cross is left.
O Don Cesar, husband, let not my sufferings
be thus repaid.
Hear me, and then condemn me if you
can.
On the day I saved you from the
fury of the mob, fate threw me in
the way of one who professed an interest
in my welfare and told me he was
commissioned by the Queen to raise me to
the station I coveted.
The means proposed were— Don Cesar,
sarcastically.
Most honourable.
Yes, most honourable, for in marrying you I
believed I wedded one who had professed a
regard for me.
Tremulously.
One for whom I have felt a deeper
interest than for any other being.
Are you deceiving?
Are these tears the offspring of deceit?
Cesar's hand anneals.
O husband, I have suffered for my pride.
But be thou to judge how I have
preserved thy honour.
If I have been faithless, let me answer
with my life.
Fearful conditions, Maritana.
I dare abide the issue.
O Don Cesar, you know not to what
a thing of power that love has grown
which had its birth almost at the altar.
The hours of fear and self-reproach which
I have passed have made your image an
idol to my heart.
Don Cesar, embracing her.
I must believe you, Maritana.
Don Cesar, the adventurer, is no more.
A Count Garofa will live worthy of his
name, since you must share it with him.
A drum heard.
Ah, soldiers approach the house.
Then fly, save yourself.
Fly?
When the king is at your chamber door?
Fear not for me.
Go seek the queen.
She is at Aranges.
Tell her that Maritana is in danger.
She will rescue me.
Not whilst I have a sword to second
a stout heart.
Maritana clinging to him.
I know how much, sorry, I know how
much I ask of you, who would rather
trust her your own arm and seek succour
of a woman.
But for my sake, for her who will
prove how deeply she adores you, go to
the queen.
Don Cesar kisses her.
To the queen.
Exit centre.
She kneels before a Madonna.
Organ heard.
At the end of organ, Lazzarillo enters, left
door.
Madam, the king.
What is to be done?
Do not leave me, Lazzarillo.
He will order me to withdraw.
True, you must obey him, but at least
let me have some protection.
Takes a dagger from his girdle.
At the worst, this will free me from
his power.
The king enters left.
King to Lazzarillo.
Where is the stranger that I left here?
Gone, sire.
What has brought him here?
He had escaped from prison, sire.
Leave us.
Lazzarillo looks at Maritana.
Lazzarillo, obey the orders of his majesty.
Exit Lazzarillo, left door.
Majesty, who has dared to betray me?
He that has betrayed you, sire, is the
same who counselled you to commit a meanness
unworthy of a king.
How, madam?
He who has made a mockery of the
altar, who brought you to me as my
husband, the Count de Bazin.
Maritana, I am the king.
My pride has long revolted at the deceit
we practised on you.
Now that you know me for what I
am, listen to me.
Leave me, sire.
I implore you, leave me.
Leave you?
You, the only one I have ever truly
loved?
O sire, in pity go.
Be generous, be merciful.
But one embrace, one.
Maritana draws dagger.
One step nearer and I strike.
What, Maritana, am I so loathsome to you?
No, sire.
I am a wife of one who must
find me worthy of him, or find me
no more.
Of whom speak you?
Of my husband.
Don Cesar de Bazin.
He is dead.
Don Cesar enters left door.
Not yet, sire, thanks to your majesty's
gracious pardon.
Crosses to him and throws dagger down.
My husband will protect me.
Your husband?
Don Cesar crosses right, locks both doors,
and takes out keys.
What have you done, sir?
Don Cesar right door.
Locked the door, sire, that no one may
enter, that no one may hear, that to
which we alone should listen.
Crosses a centre, Maritana a side.
What will be the end of this?
Don Cesar fiercely.
If the persecutor of my wife had been
a gentleman and soldier like myself, I fear
that I should have denied him even the
chance of an encounter.
I think that at once I should have
dispatched him.
For in such a case one does not
look for reparation but revenge.
You, sire, are my king.
Presents his sword.
And thus do I disarm my vengeance.
You are speaking, sir, to the king of
Spain.
To whom else should I speak?
We cannot always subdue the will or restrain
the hand.
I will render both powerless.
Throws away sword.
But reparation must be made.
King with effort.
Proceed, sir.
Your audacity pleases me.
Remember, Don Cesar, it is your king.
Yes, it is my king.
Sire, this poor, weak woman, against whom
such power has combined, has sought the
protection of our beloved queen.
The queen?
Yes, sire.
I was her messenger to the palace of
Arranges.
Then you have seen the queen.
You shall hear, sire.
When I arrived at the palace I was
denied admittance, but regardless of the
guns of the sentinels— Ah, you have been
in danger.
No, you forget that I am bulletproof.
Well, well.
I climbed the garden wall.
Under the shadow of some trees I crept
close to a pavilion, whence proceeded two
voices, that of a man and a woman's.
The woman, though greatly moved, spoke
proudly.
The voice of the man trembled with
passionate emotion.
I heard this.
Madam, you are deceived.
Your husband meets his mistress to-night.
Some officers of the king should follow him
to his secluded chateau in the forest and
bring you proof of his infidelity.
Who has dared to place a watch upon
my actions?
The man was Don José de Santarém, your
favourite minister.
The lady was the queen.
Tis false, if it were true.
Crosses up left towards doors.
Don César coolly— Your Majesty forgets that
I have locked the doors.
Traitor!
Comes down left.
I told you, sire, that reparation must be
made.
Do you understand me now?
The minister betrays his king.
The subject would dishonour his queen.
Don César, on your allegiance, open that
door.
The wrong you would have inflicted on me
another now practises towards you.
Yet you cannot leave this room.
The king puts his hands to his face
and falls in a chair.
Every moment is an age of agony, and
yet you cannot quit this place to satisfy
your doubt.
All that you made me suffer you are
now enduring, and yet you cannot stir but
at my will.
King points to door.
Don César, at your peril, hesitate a moment
longer.
This retribution is terrible, is it not?
Take up your sword.
Rises.
I am a king no longer.
Your treason forces me to become your equal.
Defend yourself and save me from becoming an
assassin.
Maritana crosses centre and is put back by
Don César.
Oh, sire, for heaven's sake!
King left.
Take up your sword or I will strike.
You will be too late.
Too late?
How?
When did a Spanish gentleman hesitate to
revenge an insult to his king?
Think you I have spared the man who
had made my dishonour the stepping-stone to
yours?
No, sire, I have struck.
Sire, your honour is preserved.
It is now your turn to deal with
mine.
Kneels and points to Maritana.
King raises him.
Rise, Don César.
Drum heard in cries of, The king!
The king!
The doors are burst open and nobles enter.
Lazorillo takes back chair.
The king!
Yes, gentlemen, we have visited Don César de
Bezan, one of your most faithful servants.
All seem surprised.
Don César de Bezan, we have appointed you
governor of Valencia.
The government of Granada is also vacant,
sire.
Why rather Granada than Valencia?
Granada is twice the distance from Madrid.
Points to Maritana.
And that doubles the obligation.
And besides, there I've no creditors.
King smiles.
Be it as you wish, we appoint our
faithful subject, Don César de Bezan,
governor of Granada.
Finale.
Long live the king!
Whoever repairs our love with love again,
Let peace be joined to length of days.
Let peace be joined to bless his happy
reign.
End of Act 3 End of Don César
de Bezan by Aldofe de Ennery and Dumanois
Translated by Mark Lemon and G.
A.
Abecant